Add a tutorial (#19)
fsfe/reuse-docs: tutorial/tutorial.md

<!--
SPDX-Copyright: Free Software Foundation Europe e.V.

SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-SA-4.0
-->

# Tutorial: How to become REUSE compliant

This tutorial explains the basic methods of how to make a software project REUSE
compliant. By the end of this document, all your files will clearly have their
copyright and licensing marked, and you will be able to verify this using a
linter tool.

Making your project REUSE compliant can be done in three simple steps:

1. Choose and provide licenses
2. Add copyright and license information to each file
3. Confirm REUSE compliance

For the purpose of this tutorial, we will assume that the directory of your
project looks like this:

```
project/
├── img/
│   ├── cat.jpg
│   └── dog.jpg
├── src/
│   └── main.c
├── .gitignore
├── Makefile
└── README.md
```

If you would like to reproduce the steps in this tutorial on your own
computer, you can clone the [example
repository](https://github.com/fsfe/reuse-example). The branch `noncompliant`
matches the structure above, while the `master` branch is the successful
result of this repository.

## 1. Choose and provide licenses

The first thing you need to do is to [choose a

> license](https://choosealicense.com/). For this tutorial, we assume that you

Author: The correct link is probably https://reuse.software/faq#which-license

> license](https://choosealicense.com/). For this tutorial, we assume that you

Author: Fixed this link in dd090545dd1bd9c88393509807a723aa130fc503

> chose the GNU General Public Licence v3.0 or any later version (GPL). More

Author: This doesn't make a lot of sense in context, because SPDX identifiers haven't been introduced yet:

The first thing you need to do is to [choose a
license](https://choosealicense.com/). For this tutorial, we assume that you
chose the GNU General Public Licence v3.0 or any later version (GPL). More
than simply choosing a license, you need to put the license in your project
directory.

You find your license in the [SPDX License List](https://spdx.org/licenses/).
SPDX is an open standard for communicating license and copyright information.
Each license is uniquely identified by a shortform [SPDX
identifier](https://spdx.org/ids). The SPDX identifier for your chosen license
is GPL-3.0-or-later.

Each license is uniquely identified by a shortform [SPDX
identifier](https://spdx.org/ids). The SPDX identifier for your chosen license
is GPL-3.0-or-later.

<!-- TODO: Use tool instead -->

You create a `LICENSES` directory in your project root which will contain all
the licenses that you use in your project. You then download your license
from the
[license-list-data](https://github.com/spdx/license-list-data/tree/master/text)
repository and put it in the `LICENSES` directory.

## 2. Add copyright and license information to each file

Now that you have a license, you need to indicate in the relevant files that
these files fall under that license. You edit the comment header of
`src/main.c` as such:

```
/*
 * SPDX-Copyright: 2019 Jane Doe <jane@example.com>
 *
 * SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
 */
```

<!-- FIXME: Fix links -->

The `SPDX-Copyright` tag records the publication years and copyright holder
of the contents of the file. You can read more about [which publication years
to use]() and [what copyright holders are]() in the FAQ.

The `SPDX-License-Identifier` tag is followed by a [valid SPDX License

> Expression](https://spdx.org/specifications), typically just the SPDX

Author: I agree with changing the URL, but I'm not sure about the change from License Expression to License Identifier.

From the spec:

> SPDX License Expressions provides a way for one to construct expressions that more accurately represent the licensing terms typically found in open source software source code. A license expression could be a single license identifier found on the SPDX License List; a user defined license reference denoted by the LicenseRef-{idString}; a license identifier combined with an SPDX exception; or some combination of license identifiers, license references and exceptions constructed using a small set of defined operators (e.g., AND, OR, WITH and +). We provide the definition of what constitutes a valid an SPDX License Expression in this section. 

So it seems to me:

identifier = single tag
expression = combined tags (or single tag)

The fact that the tag `SPDX-License-Identifier:` says identifier instead of expression is confusing, though.

> Expression](https://spdx.org/specifications), typically just the SPDX

Author: Wait, I didn't read the suggestion quite right. There are three terms here, not two:

SPDX License Expression: Combined tags
SPDX License Identifier: Single tag
SPDX Identifier: References within the document

I think?

> Expression](https://spdx.org/specifications), typically just the SPDX

Reviewer: That is how I understand it, yes. Summoning @jlovejoy and @kestewart for confirmation.

Identifier of the license.

<!-- FIXME: Fix links -->

Each file must always contain these two tags in the header. You are allowed
to [use the tags multiple times if you have multiple copyright holders or
licenses]().

In the example project, you also edit `Makefile` and `README.md` using this
header information, but of course with corresponding comment syntax.

### Binary and uncommentable files

> You also want to license your image files under GPL-3.0-or-later.

Author: I think you're not reading the intent of the section. It has the following intent:

- A non-plaintext file cannot contain a header. An image is a very obvious example.

- We _expressly_ license these wrongly so that we can fix them in a later paragraph.

- Adding the complexity of "licensing images under the GPL is a bad idea" makes this tutorial longer than it needs to be, and one of the express goals of the tutorial is to be as short as possible.

- CC0 images were chosen so that we can safely lie about their licensing (while still referring to the authors if people are so inclined). But @mxmehl  is proposing to fix this with his own images, which also works.

Unfortunately, images and other binary files do not have comment headers that
one can easily edit. Other examples include automatically generated files and
certain data and configuration files for which comments are non-trivial.

There is a simple trick to circumvent this. Create the files `cat.jpg.license`
and `dog.jpg.license`, each containing the same information about license and
copyright holder as above.

<!-- TODO: Add link to DEP-5 possibility. -->

### Change licensing information

> You discover that the photo of the cat was not licensed under the GPL at all,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You discover that the photos of the cat and the dog were not licensed under the GPL at all,
```

Author: Fixed in 36a8b3b, as well as the other grievances in this section

but under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International.

> The SPDX Identifier of this license is CC-BY-4.0.  You create

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SPDX Identifier of this license is CC0-1.0.  You create
```

> the file `LICENSES/CC-BY-4.0.txt`, following the same steps you used for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the file `LICENSES/CC0-1.0.txt`, following the same steps you used for
```

GPL-3.0-or-later.

You then edit `cat.jpg.license` to say:

```

> SPDX-Copyright: 2017 Joe Somebody <joe@example.com>

Reviewer: Perhaps we should also include the fact that the reader found out that the copyright in the image is held by Peter Janzen

Or perhaps we need better example images.

> SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC0-1.0
```

```

### Build artifacts

> When you compile your program, you generate some build artifacts, such as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you compile your program, you generate some (temporary) build artifacts, such as
```

Author: Don't see the utility of the word temporary here.

> `src/main.o`.  You do not need to provide any licensing information for those

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`src/main.o`.  As you likely do not intend to distribute those, you do not need to provide any licensing information for those
```

Author: I'm not really sure about the clarification here. For REUSE compliance, you don't need to provide licensing information about build artifacts. We're targeting mostly FOSS developers here, who don't really bother about licensing build artifacts because you can always derive that from the source components. If you want to license build artifacts anyway, then there are better ways to do that than REUSE.

This seems like a FAQ entry to me. "How do I license build artifacts?" Then the complications can be left out of the tutorial.

Reviewer: My thinking here (and the comment above) is in REUSE we don’t care about build artefacts _because_ they are not distributed further. If they ended up on the downstream’s disk either through `git clone` or by unpackaging an archive, it would need to be tracked.
